talks/2019_11_12-Intro_to_Ethereum.md, before:

---
marp: true
---

# Intro to Ethereum, crypto, web 3, etc.

[@paulcowgill](https://twitter.com/paulcowgill)

---

## Who am I?

- [@paulcowgill](https://twitter.com/paulcowgill) on Twitter
- [GitHub](https://github.com/pcowgill/)
- [Medium](https://medium.com/@paulcowgill)
- [Website](https://cowgill.io/)
- I help with organizing the [Chicago Ethereum Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/Chicago-Ethereum-Meetup/)

---

## Why Ethereum?

It's what basically all developers use.

---

## This workshop

The markdown file with all of this info we'll be talking about is available at:

[bit.ly/intro-to-ethereum-2019](https://bit.ly/intro-to-ethereum-2019)

Alternatively, you can get here directly via GitHub:

[github.com/pcowgill/talks](https://github.com/pcowgill/talks)

In this workshop, let's get acquainted with the different components of the crypto / web3 stack and the current state of blockchain technology by using some tools from the Ethereum ecosystem.

---

## Any questions?

Feel free to interrupt me at any time. Freeform / real-time questions work best for me.

Or if you're feeling shy, we can crowdsource questions online. Go to [sli.do](https://www.sli.do/) and enter the event code `#northwestern-ethereum`. I'll stop to check for the most upvoted questions at some point during the workshop.

---

### What to expect (pt. 1)

- [set up a wallet](#set-up-a-wallet)
- [get test ether](#get-test-ether)
- [explore the blockchain](#explore-the-blockchain-pt-2)
- [gas](#gas)
- [unique tokens](#unique-tokens)
- [dapps](#dapps)
- [stablecoins](#stablecoins)

---

### What to expect (pt. 2)

- [room for improvement](#room-for-improvement)
- [nodes / clients](#nodes--clients)
- [developing smart contracts](#developing-smart-contracts)
- [why is this important](#why-is-this-important)
- [privacy](#privacy)
- [layer 2](#layer-2)
- [eth 2.0](#eth-2.0)

---

### Set up a wallet

While there are lots of choices for wallets, it will be the simplest if you all use [MetaMask](https://metamask.io/) for today.

I'll send you all testnet ETH shortly using the [testnet version](https://testflight.apple.com/join/r9q5stIb) of the [Gnosis Safe](https://safe.gnosis.io/) (a different Ethereum wallet that has cool features like account recovery).

There are lots of other great alternatives that we won't have time to try out today including: [Argent](https://www.argent.xyz), [Coinbase Wallet](https://wallet.coinbase.com/), [Status](https://status.im/), and [Trust](https://trustwallet.com/).

---

### Get test Ether

**`{ Walk around scanning QR codes to send ETH on the Rinkeby testnet }`**

- While you wait, jump down below to the [Explore the blockchain](#explore-the-blockchain) section.

---

### Explore the blockchain (pt. 1)

- Viewing the transactions we just made in the `Get test ether` section on [Etherscan](https://rinkeby.etherscan.io/address/0x1ae4455438316a80E93e1Bb1F6EEbF049eb2A0fB)

- Sending Ether between each other **`{ see next slide }`**

---

### Let's vote

Let's all send some to one person **`{ Let's pick who on sli.do }`**

---

## Other wallet types

---

##### Burner wallets

`{ Play with xdai to show how burner wallets and meta-transactions can be used to onboard new users into the ecosystem without gas.}`

[xdai.io](https://xdai.io/)

Likely follow-up questions:

- Wait, but what is DAI? [See below](#stablecoins)
- [xDai explanation](https://medium.com/poa-network/poa-network-partners-with-makerdao-on-xdai-chain-the-first-ever-usd-stable-blockchain-65a078c41e6a)
- [Blockscout for xDai](https://blockscout.com/poa/dai)
- [Dai Bridge](https://dai-bridge.poa.network/)

---

### Contract-based accounts

- [Abridged](https://abridged.io/)
- [Authereum](https://authereum.org/)
- [Universal login](https://universallogin.io/)
- [Dharma](https://www.dharma.io/smart-wallet)

---

### Explore the blockchain (pt. 2)

- Subscribe for notifications of transactions involving a certain address on etherscan.

Here are some alternatives to Etherscan:

---

##### Via a UI

- [Blockscout](https://blockscout.com)

- [Alethio](https://aleth.io/)

- [Ganache](https://truffleframework.com/ganache)

Others include [ethplorer](https://ethplorer.io/), [scout.cool](https://www.scout.cool/), [Elementus](https://elementus.io/), [State of the Dapps](https://www.stateofthedapps.com/) and [Dappradar](https://dappradar.com).

---

##### Programmatically

- [eth.events](https://eth.events/)

- [Graph protocol](https://thegraph.com)

- [Google's BigQuery dataset for Ethereum](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/data-analytics/ethereum-bigquery-public-dataset-smart-contract-analytics),

- [VulcanizeDB](https://github.com/vulcanize/VulcanizeDB)

---

### Gas

`{ Talk a bit about how gas is used with Ethereum }`

- [ETH gas station](https://ethgasstation.info/)
- [gastoken](https://gastoken.io/)

---

### Stablecoins

`// Optional: Obtaining a stablecoin such as DAI through the MKR contract and transacting it between each other.`

- [DAI explainer video](https://vimeo.com/247715549)
- [Buy DAI](https://oasis.direct/)
- Also [Basis](https://www.basis.io/), "fiat coins", etc.

---

##### ERC standards

[ERC standards](https://eips.ethereum.org/erc) like ERC20 for tokens (like DAI, the Aragon token, etc.) and ERC721 (like Cryptokitties, Decentraland, etc.) for collectibles (things we covered above).

"Application-level standards and conventions, including contract standards such as token standards (ERC20), name registries (ERC137), URI schemes (ERC681), library/package formats (EIP190), and wallet formats (EIP85)."

Source: https://eips.ethereum.org/

---

### Unique tokens

_But it's not just about money..._

Unique tokens are also known as NFTs or digital collectibles.

`{ Optional: Purchase a digital collectible and exchanging it with other classmates. }`

- [CryptoKitties](https://www.cryptokitties.co/)
- [Decentraland](https://decentraland.org/)
- [CryptoZombies](https://cryptozombies.io/) by [Loom Network](https://loomx.io/)
- [Vault](https://vault.io/)

---

# Dapps

---

#### DAOs

**Note: You should be logged into the MetaMask browser extension and load this page on a PC in order for it to show up properly.**

- [Aragon](https://rinkeby.aragon.org/#/) on testnet
- [Moloch](https://molochdao.com/)

**`{ Set up an Aragon DAO for the group }`**

Here's the link for the Rinkeby testnet DAO we created during the workshop:

[rinkeby.aragon.org/#/nublock/](https://rinkeby.aragon.org/#/nublock/)

---

#### TCRs

`// Skip for now, but happy to field questions via sli.do if people are interested.`

---

#### DeFi

**Exchanges**

[Uniswap](https://uniswap.exchange)

**Lending**

[Dharma](https://dharma.io/)

**Credit**

[Bloom](https://bloom.co/)

**Insurance**

[Nexus Mutual](https://www.nexusmutual.io/)

**Prediction markets**
[Guesser](https://guesser.com/) and [Sight by Gnosis](https://sight.pm/)

**`{ Try Uniswap }`**

---

##### Art

[Clovers](https://clovers.network/)
[SuperRare](https://www.superrare.co/)
[Known Origin](https://knownorigin.io/)

---

##### Music

[Audius](https://audius.co/)

---

##### Identity

[3Box](https://3box.io/)
[Humanity DAO](https://www.humanitydao.org/)
[BrightID](https://www.brightid.org/)

---

##### Marketplaces

- [OpenSea](https://opensea.io/)
- [Decentraland Marketplace](https://market.decentraland.org/)
- [Gitcoin](https://gitcoin.co/)
- [0x](https://www.0xproject.com/)

---

##### Other

[ENS](https://ens.domains/)

---

### Room for improvement

**`{ Discuss which tools so far have room for improvement }`**

Let's have an open discussion of observations about the state of the tooling you all have used so far today, what was missing, what could be done better, etc.

This (hopefully) will give you an understanding of how young this ecosystem is and what you could do to push it forward.

[A (slightly dated) overview of UX challenges](https://medium.com/ecf-review/challenge-of-ux-in-ethereum-122e1a33688d)

---

### Nodes / clients

The [geth](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum) node: a client that helps to run the Ethereum blockchain, accept transactions, and advance the state of the chain.

[geth docs](https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/getting-started)

    Full: Downloads all blocks (including headers, transactions and receipts) and generates the state of the blockchain incrementally by executing every block.
    Fast (Default): Downloads all blocks (including headers, transactions and receipts), verifies all headers, and downloads the state and verifies it against the headers.
    Light: Downloads all block headers, block data, and verifies some randomly.

`{ Perhaps also discuss Parity and Nimbus }`

[Nimbus](https://nimbus.status.im/)

---

### Developing smart contracts

A project set up on [studio.ethereum.org](https://studio.ethereum.org/5dcb1bb026b473001233da59?openFile=README.md)

The [Truffle](https://truffleframework.com/) framework for developing smart contracts

Or [Buidler, ethers.js, Waffle, and TypeChain](https://hackernoon.com/the-new-solidity-dev-stack-buidler-ethers-waffle-typescript-706830w0)

---

##### OpenZeppelin

[OpenZeppelin](https://openzeppelin.org/) is a library for inheriting from and extending existing smart contract logic, and also a CLI for making upgradeable dapps.

---

### Why is this important

1. [Twitter thread](https://twitter.com/naval/status/877467629308395521) with a historical perspective on governance by Naval Ravikant
1. [AI -> tyranny, blockchain -> democracy](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2018/10/yuval-noah-harari-technology-tyranny/568330/)
1. [The Truth Machine](https://smile.amazon.com/Truth-Machine-Blockchain-Future-Everything/dp/1250114578/)
1. [Social justice](https://medium.com/swlh/crypto-for-activism-four-models-of-protest-on-the-ethereum-blockchain-61ca5d07ac47)
1. [Social good](https://www.meetup.com/Blockchain-for-Social-Good-Chicago/)
1. [Podcast episode about why decentralization matters](https://www.breaker.audio/a16z/e/35542740)
1. [Toy markets](https://blog.ycombinator.com/toy-markets/)
1. Zero platform risk -> the great unbundling of front end and back end (and of individual front end features). Users get "right to exit" meaning that they can elect to use alternative clients without losing all of their data and the network effect of the platform, and the tech tycoons of the future can't prevent them from doing so.

---

### Privacy

If time allows, we will discuss privacy on Ethereum and how other blockchains incorporate it as a first-tier feature.

We'll also discuss how private technologies like zero-knowledge proofs could be introduced to the Ethereum blockchain in the future.

---

##### Privacy on Ethereum

- [Nightfall](https://github.com/EYBlockchain/nightfall)
- [Hopper](https://hoppereth.org/) by Argent
- [Keep](https://keep.network/)
- [NuCypher](https://www.nucypher.com/)
- [Enigma](https://enigma.co/)
- [Hypothetical Zcash + Ethereum](https://twitter.com/VitalikButerin/status/1043920886183661569)

---

##### Privacy-forward cryptocurrencies

- [Zcash](https://z.cash/)
- [Monero](https://getmonero.org/)

---

### Layer 2

#### [state channels](https://statechannels.org/)

#### Rollup

[optimistic vs. zk rollup comparison](https://medium.com/matter-labs/optimistic-vs-zk-rollup-deep-dive-ea141e71e075)

##### [optimistic rollup](https://plasma.group/)

[unipig.exchange](https://unipig.exchange/)

##### zk rollup

[Matter Labs](https://matter-labs.io/)

---

### Eth 2.0

- Sharding
- Proof-of-stake
- eWASM

https://hackmd.io/e4cNiocFTiS67j6yJ_XHPw
https://hackmd.io/UzysWse1Th240HELswKqVA
https://docs.ethhub.io/other/ethereum-2.0-ama/

Commit message:

Mention how to generate slides

talks/2019_11_12-Intro_to_Ethereum.md, after:

---
marp: true
---

<!-- Note: The "marp: true" above is a setting used to render the contents of
this markdown as slides within a text editor - VS Code, to be specific -->

# Intro to Ethereum, crypto, web 3, etc.

[@paulcowgill](https://twitter.com/paulcowgill)

---

_Note:_ Slides can be autogenerated from this `.md` markdown file using a tool like [remarkjs](https://remarkjs.com/).

---

## Who am I?

- [@paulcowgill](https://twitter.com/paulcowgill) on Twitter
- [GitHub](https://github.com/pcowgill/)
- [Medium](https://medium.com/@paulcowgill)
- [Website](https://cowgill.io/)
- I help with organizing the [Chicago Ethereum Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/Chicago-Ethereum-Meetup/)

---

## Why Ethereum?

It's what basically all developers use.

---

## This workshop

The markdown file with all of this info we'll be talking about is available at:

[bit.ly/intro-to-ethereum-2019](https://bit.ly/intro-to-ethereum-2019)

Alternatively, you can get here directly via GitHub:

[github.com/pcowgill/talks](https://github.com/pcowgill/talks)

In this workshop, let's get acquainted with the different components of the crypto / web3 stack and the current state of blockchain technology by using some tools from the Ethereum ecosystem.

---

## Any questions?

Feel free to interrupt me at any time. Freeform / real-time questions work best for me.

Or if you're feeling shy, we can crowdsource questions online. Go to [sli.do](https://www.sli.do/) and enter the event code `#northwestern-ethereum`. I'll stop to check for the most upvoted questions at some point during the workshop.

---

### What to expect (pt. 1)

- [set up a wallet](#set-up-a-wallet)
- [get test ether](#get-test-ether)
- [explore the blockchain](#explore-the-blockchain-pt-2)
- [gas](#gas)
- [unique tokens](#unique-tokens)
- [dapps](#dapps)
- [stablecoins](#stablecoins)

---

### What to expect (pt. 2)

- [room for improvement](#room-for-improvement)
- [nodes / clients](#nodes--clients)
- [developing smart contracts](#developing-smart-contracts)
- [why is this important](#why-is-this-important)
- [privacy](#privacy)
- [layer 2](#layer-2)
- [eth 2.0](#eth-2.0)

---

### Set up a wallet

While there are lots of choices for wallets, it will be the simplest if you all use [MetaMask](https://metamask.io/) for today.

I'll send you all testnet ETH shortly using the [testnet version](https://testflight.apple.com/join/r9q5stIb) of the [Gnosis Safe](https://safe.gnosis.io/) (a different Ethereum wallet that has cool features like account recovery).

There are lots of other great alternatives that we won't have time to try out today including: [Argent](https://www.argent.xyz), [Coinbase Wallet](https://wallet.coinbase.com/), [Status](https://status.im/), and [Trust](https://trustwallet.com/).

---

### Get test Ether

**`{ Walk around scanning QR codes to send ETH on the Rinkeby testnet }`**

- While you wait, jump down below to the [Explore the blockchain](#explore-the-blockchain) section.

---

### Explore the blockchain (pt. 1)

- Viewing the transactions we just made in the `Get test ether` section on [Etherscan](https://rinkeby.etherscan.io/address/0x1ae4455438316a80E93e1Bb1F6EEbF049eb2A0fB)

- Sending Ether between each other **`{ see next slide }`**

---

### Let's vote

Let's all send some to one person **`{ Let's pick who on sli.do }`**

---

## Other wallet types

---

##### Burner wallets

`{ Play with xdai to show how burner wallets and meta-transactions can be used to onboard new users into the ecosystem without gas.}`

[xdai.io](https://xdai.io/)

Likely follow-up questions:

- Wait, but what is DAI? [See below](#stablecoins)
- [xDai explanation](https://medium.com/poa-network/poa-network-partners-with-makerdao-on-xdai-chain-the-first-ever-usd-stable-blockchain-65a078c41e6a)
- [Blockscout for xDai](https://blockscout.com/poa/dai)
- [Dai Bridge](https://dai-bridge.poa.network/)

---

### Contract-based accounts

- [Abridged](https://abridged.io/)
- [Authereum](https://authereum.org/)
- [Universal login](https://universallogin.io/)
- [Dharma](https://www.dharma.io/smart-wallet)

---

### Explore the blockchain (pt. 2)

- Subscribe for notifications of transactions involving a certain address on etherscan.

Here are some alternatives to Etherscan:

---

##### Via a UI

- [Blockscout](https://blockscout.com)

- [Alethio](https://aleth.io/)

- [Ganache](https://truffleframework.com/ganache)

Others include [ethplorer](https://ethplorer.io/), [scout.cool](https://www.scout.cool/), [Elementus](https://elementus.io/), [State of the Dapps](https://www.stateofthedapps.com/) and [Dappradar](https://dappradar.com).

---

##### Programmatically

- [eth.events](https://eth.events/)

- [Graph protocol](https://thegraph.com)

- [Google's BigQuery dataset for Ethereum](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/data-analytics/ethereum-bigquery-public-dataset-smart-contract-analytics),

- [VulcanizeDB](https://github.com/vulcanize/VulcanizeDB)

---

### Gas

`{ Talk a bit about how gas is used with Ethereum }`

- [ETH gas station](https://ethgasstation.info/)
- [gastoken](https://gastoken.io/)

---

### Stablecoins

`// Optional: Obtaining a stablecoin such as DAI through the MKR contract and transacting it between each other.`

- [DAI explainer video](https://vimeo.com/247715549)
- [Buy DAI](https://oasis.direct/)
- Also [Basis](https://www.basis.io/), "fiat coins", etc.

---

##### ERC standards

[ERC standards](https://eips.ethereum.org/erc) like ERC20 for tokens (like DAI, the Aragon token, etc.) and ERC721 (like Cryptokitties, Decentraland, etc.) for collectibles (things we covered above).

"Application-level standards and conventions, including contract standards such as token standards (ERC20), name registries (ERC137), URI schemes (ERC681), library/package formats (EIP190), and wallet formats (EIP85)."

Source: https://eips.ethereum.org/

---

### Unique tokens

_But it's not just about money..._

Unique tokens are also known as NFTs or digital collectibles.

`{ Optional: Purchase a digital collectible and exchanging it with other classmates. }`

- [CryptoKitties](https://www.cryptokitties.co/)
- [Decentraland](https://decentraland.org/)
- [CryptoZombies](https://cryptozombies.io/) by [Loom Network](https://loomx.io/)
- [Vault](https://vault.io/)

---

# Dapps

---

#### DAOs

**Note: You should be logged into the MetaMask browser extension and load this page on a PC in order for it to show up properly.**

- [Aragon](https://rinkeby.aragon.org/#/) on testnet
- [Moloch](https://molochdao.com/)

**`{ Set up an Aragon DAO for the group }`**

Here's the link for the Rinkeby testnet DAO we created during the workshop:

[rinkeby.aragon.org/#/nublock/](https://rinkeby.aragon.org/#/nublock/)

---

#### TCRs

`// Skip for now, but happy to field questions via sli.do if people are interested.`

---

#### DeFi

**Exchanges**

[Uniswap](https://uniswap.exchange)

**Lending**

[Dharma](https://dharma.io/)

**Credit**

[Bloom](https://bloom.co/)

**Insurance**

[Nexus Mutual](https://www.nexusmutual.io/)

**Prediction markets**
[Guesser](https://guesser.com/) and [Sight by Gnosis](https://sight.pm/)

**`{ Try Uniswap }`**

---

##### Art

[Clovers](https://clovers.network/)
[SuperRare](https://www.superrare.co/)
[Known Origin](https://knownorigin.io/)

---

##### Music

[Audius](https://audius.co/)

---

##### Identity

[3Box](https://3box.io/)
[Humanity DAO](https://www.humanitydao.org/)
[BrightID](https://www.brightid.org/)

---

##### Marketplaces

- [OpenSea](https://opensea.io/)
- [Decentraland Marketplace](https://market.decentraland.org/)
- [Gitcoin](https://gitcoin.co/)
- [0x](https://www.0xproject.com/)

---

##### Other

[ENS](https://ens.domains/)

---

### Room for improvement

**`{ Discuss which tools so far have room for improvement }`**

Let's have an open discussion of observations about the state of the tooling you all have used so far today, what was missing, what could be done better, etc.

This (hopefully) will give you an understanding of how young this ecosystem is and what you could do to push it forward.

[A (slightly dated) overview of UX challenges](https://medium.com/ecf-review/challenge-of-ux-in-ethereum-122e1a33688d)

---

### Nodes / clients

The [geth](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum) node: a client that helps to run the Ethereum blockchain, accept transactions, and advance the state of the chain.

[geth docs](https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/getting-started)

    Full: Downloads all blocks (including headers, transactions and receipts) and generates the state of the blockchain incrementally by executing every block.
    Fast (Default): Downloads all blocks (including headers, transactions and receipts), verifies all headers, and downloads the state and verifies it against the headers.
    Light: Downloads all block headers, block data, and verifies some randomly.

`{ Perhaps also discuss Parity and Nimbus }`

[Nimbus](https://nimbus.status.im/)

---

### Developing smart contracts

A project set up on [studio.ethereum.org](https://studio.ethereum.org/5dcb1bb026b473001233da59?openFile=README.md)

The [Truffle](https://truffleframework.com/) framework for developing smart contracts

Or [Buidler, ethers.js, Waffle, and TypeChain](https://hackernoon.com/the-new-solidity-dev-stack-buidler-ethers-waffle-typescript-706830w0)

---

##### OpenZeppelin

[OpenZeppelin](https://openzeppelin.org/) is a library for inheriting from and extending existing smart contract logic, and also a CLI for making upgradeable dapps.

---

### Why is this important

1. [Twitter thread](https://twitter.com/naval/status/877467629308395521) with a historical perspective on governance by Naval Ravikant
1. [AI -> tyranny, blockchain -> democracy](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2018/10/yuval-noah-harari-technology-tyranny/568330/)
1. [The Truth Machine](https://smile.amazon.com/Truth-Machine-Blockchain-Future-Everything/dp/1250114578/)
1. [Social justice](https://medium.com/swlh/crypto-for-activism-four-models-of-protest-on-the-ethereum-blockchain-61ca5d07ac47)
1. [Social good](https://www.meetup.com/Blockchain-for-Social-Good-Chicago/)
1. [Podcast episode about why decentralization matters](https://www.breaker.audio/a16z/e/35542740)
1. [Toy markets](https://blog.ycombinator.com/toy-markets/)
1. Zero platform risk -> the great unbundling of front end and back end (and of individual front end features). Users get "right to exit" meaning that they can elect to use alternative clients without losing all of their data and the network effect of the platform, and the tech tycoons of the future can't prevent them from doing so.

---

### Privacy

If time allows, we will discuss privacy on Ethereum and how other blockchains incorporate it as a first-tier feature.

We'll also discuss how private technologies like zero-knowledge proofs could be introduced to the Ethereum blockchain in the future.

---

##### Privacy on Ethereum

- [Nightfall](https://github.com/EYBlockchain/nightfall)
- [Hopper](https://hoppereth.org/) by Argent
- [Keep](https://keep.network/)
- [NuCypher](https://www.nucypher.com/)
- [Enigma](https://enigma.co/)
- [Hypothetical Zcash + Ethereum](https://twitter.com/VitalikButerin/status/1043920886183661569)

---

##### Privacy-forward cryptocurrencies

- [Zcash](https://z.cash/)
- [Monero](https://getmonero.org/)

---

### Layer 2

#### [state channels](https://statechannels.org/)

#### Rollup

[optimistic vs. zk rollup comparison](https://medium.com/matter-labs/optimistic-vs-zk-rollup-deep-dive-ea141e71e075)

##### [optimistic rollup](https://plasma.group/)

[unipig.exchange](https://unipig.exchange/)

##### zk rollup

[Matter Labs](https://matter-labs.io/)

---

### Eth 2.0

- Sharding
- Proof-of-stake
- eWASM

https://hackmd.io/e4cNiocFTiS67j6yJ_XHPw
https://hackmd.io/UzysWse1Th240HELswKqVA
https://docs.ethhub.io/other/ethereum-2.0-ama/
